[Music]
okay picture this
trained animals class illusionist doing
tricks acrobats flying up in the air and
of course women showing off their
tattoos that's right
it's America's Got Talent no actually
it's how a circus look just a century
ago but thanks to one brave lady tattoos
became something more than a strange
attraction
her name was Maud Wagner she was born in
a small County in Kansas in 1877 her
parents lived on a farm and when she got
older she decided to leave the quiet
life behind she joined a traveling
circus and started out as a cop or
shinai it was a twist of fate she didn't
know at that
but this bold move would change the
course of her entire life and I'll get
to that later for a while Maud toured
the United States working in various
sideshows and circus acts as an
aerialist at the time and that's how she
ended up at the st. Louis World's Fair
held in 1904 in st. Louis Missouri it
celebrated the acquisition of Louisiana
which had happened a century earlier the
fare was so large that it lasted over
seven months delegations from
practically every American state along
with many other countries gathered there
to present their recent findings and
inventions troops and also individual
performers flocked there to demonstrate
their talents one of them was Gus Wagner
he was a former seaman and a few years
before he found his true calling in
between his journeys during his stay in
Java and Borneo he picked up the skill
of creating tattoos from the natives
that's when he made it his life's
mission to propagate this unique art
Wagner began traveling with circuses
just like Maude did he tattooed other
people and flaunted his own tattooed
body little by little he had over 260
designs on his own skin it's no wonder
that at the time he became known as the
most artistically marked up man in Amer
at that time electric tattoo machines
already existed tattooist Samuel
O'Reilly patented the first one in 1891
as a matter of fact it was based on one
of Thomas Edison's early inventions
O'Reilly was the one who discovered his
electric pen design and simply adopted
it to hold a tattoo needle the resulting
device made it possible for tattoo
artists to work much faster though the
machine was widely used by his
colleagues Wagner preferred the good old
stick and poke technique that the
tribesmen taught him to create a picture
he would take a sharp stick or a needle
dipped in ink and poke the skin by hand
he followed this method all his life
becoming one of the last tattoo artists
in the US who worked in this old-school
way so when maud and gus met each other
at the fair he was already a fairly
established artist people called him the
tattooed Globetrotter they liked each
other and as the legend goes he asked
maud to go on a date with him but not
for nothing because in exchange he
agreed to teach her how to make a tattoo
one painful lesson followed another
until Maud was so good at it that she
could tattoo both herself and others she
became Wagner's finest apprentice as
well as his canvas in no time she was
covered with almost as many symbols as
he was her tattoos look pretty different
from the ones were used to butterflies
birds trees women and lions were on her
chest and limbs looked like something
out of an old fairy tale she also had
her name written on her left arm from
today's perspective these drawings may
look simple or even childish actually
they were quite typical for that time
what was definitely not common in the
early 20th century was women with body
modifications truth be told even tattoos
on men were still highly associated with
the criminal world marked up girls were
especially rare and as a result the
public consider them weirdos and even
freaks people paid to see them and dime
museums in spectacles the same way they
paid to see exotic
animals or magicians it's no surprise
that many marked up women did so just to
earn a living some of them made up
extravagant backstories claiming that
Native Americans had captured and
branded them that of course was for a
reason in the 1850s the story of a
teenage girl with mysterious marks on
her face shocked America olive Oatman
was kidnapped by the natives and ended
up living among the Mojave people after
a few years she managed to escape but by
that time she had tattoos on her chin
that were typical for the tribe but very
unusual for everyone else after that she
travelled through the US telling stories
of her misfortunes the book written
about her was a best-seller decades
later circus workers use oatman's
adventures as a starting point for their
own narratives but that wasn't the case
for Maud she dedicated herself to this
art because she fell in love with it and
as it happened she fell in love with her
teacher Gus at the same time the two of
them got married a couple of years after
they met their union may have been
really unusual but they were partners in
every sense of the word they lived and
worked together and of course they also
tattooed each other together they
drifted from one corner of the states to
another working in circuses and later in
vaudeville shows surely because of the
era they lived in they initially had to
perform as living attractions
entertaining the crowds at fairs and
festivals but they're most passionate
job was creating tattoos Maud was the
first female tattoo artist in America
unlike many other masters of her time
who had switched to special devices she
always remained true to the hand poke
approach that she learned from her
husband she started with inking her
friends from the circus pretty soon she
had new clients who desperately wanted
to have one of Maude's works on their
skin the art of tattoo in the u.s.
originally emerged along the east coast
and west coast
when the first tattooed sailors returned
from their journeys Maud and Gus were
the ones who brought this craft to the
parts of their
country where people had hardly ever
seen in each person tattooing which was
once treated as something shameful and
offensive became an art form thanks in
large part to the Wagner's and it's not
only because they were artists
themselves in fact they did their best
to make sure they had someone to take
over the family business in 1910 their
daughter Latifah was born since she's
definitely seen far more tattoos than
any other child of her time would see in
their entire lifetime there was no doubt
what her future job would be one might
even say that she was a little too eager
to follow in her parents footsteps she
made her first tat when she was just 9
years old what's even more amazing is
that in her long life she never did a
single tattoo on her own body at first
it was because of her mom this may come
as a surprise to you but Maude for some
reason forbade us to ink their own
daughter
I guess Latifah was really a loyal kid
because after that she decided that if
her own dad couldn't tattoo her no one
else would and like her parents Latifah
never used a tattoo machine in her work
choosing the more traditional style
instead after all that's how her family
made history eventually Maude paved the
way for many other bold women who became
tattoo artists despite the prejudices
during the 1930s Millie Hall was the one
who rocked the tattoo world it's even
more interesting that their stories had
some curious similarities for starters
Paul also began her working life in a
circus but as a dancer soon she heard
she could make way more money if she was
tattooed it didn't take very long before
she was covered all over and the man who
marked her skin for the first time was
Charlie Wagner first let me say that no
unfortunately he and Watts family
weren't related so the last name was
just a coincidence but Charlie was a
legend in his own right
remember Samuel O'Reilly who invented
the tattoo machine in 1904 Wagner
patented his modified version later he
actually occupied the same studio that
Riley had previously owned so it does
seem like everything's connected in this
industry right after he introduced
halted tattooing she became a tattoo
artist herself in 1936 an article about
her appeared in the Family Circle
magazine there she was in all her glory
demonstrating her extraordinary talents
among the celebrity news and
housekeeping tips I guess that must have
been pretty inspiring for other women
whose lives were far from the
stereotypes by the end of the 1930s
Milly had her own tattoo shop the tattoo
Emporium it was located in a small
barber shop in the Bowery in New York
City she was one of the few women who
worked in this area which by the way had
been crucial for tattoo masters and fans
for decades these days highly decorated
women wouldn't shock anyone and the
number of female tattoo artists isn't
getting any smaller body modifications
become not only an art in itself
but also a way of empowerment tattoos
helped many girls feel free and strong
and that's all thanks to that gutsy
Acrobat who wasn't afraid to see her
body as a piece of art so what other
female artists inspire you let me know
down in the comments if you learned
something new today
then give this video a like and share it
with a friend but hey don't go get
highly-decorated just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life